Math
public final class Math 
extends Object 

java.lang.Object
   ?	java.lang.Math

The class Math contains methods for performing basic numeric operations such as the elementary exponential, logarithm, square root, and trigonometric functions.

Unlike some of the numeric methods of class StrictMath, all implementations of the equivalent functions of class Math are not defined to return the bit-for-bit same results. This relaxation permits better-performing implementations where strict reproducibility is not required.

By default many of the Math methods simply call the equivalent method in StrictMath for their implementation. Code generators are encouraged to use platform-specific native libraries or microprocessor instructions, where available, to provide higher-performance implementations of Math methods. Such higher-performance implementations still must conform to the specification for Math.

The quality of implementation specifications concern two properties, accuracy of the returned result and monotonicity of the method. Accuracy of the floating-point Math methods is measured in terms of ulps, units in the last place. For a given floating-point format, an ulp of a specific real number value is the distance between the two floating-point values bracketing that numerical value. When discussing the accuracy of a method as a whole rather than at a specific argument, the number of ulps cited is for the worst-case error at any argument. If a method always has an error less than 0.5 ulps, the method always returns the floating-point number nearest the exact result; such a method is correctly rounded. A correctly rounded method is generally the best a floating-point approximation can be; however, it is impractical for many floating-point methods to be correctly rounded. Instead, for the Math class, a larger error bound of 1 or 2 ulps is allowed for certain methods. Informally, with a 1 ulp error bound, when the exact result is a representable number, the exact result should be returned as the computed result; otherwise, either of the two floating-point values which bracket the exact result may be returned. For exact results large in magnitude, one of the endpoints of the bracket may be infinite. Besides accuracy at individual arguments, maintaining proper relations between the method at different arguments is also important. Therefore, most methods with more than 0.5 ulp errors are required to be semi-monotonic: whenever the mathematical function is non-decreasing, so is the floating-point approximation, likewise, whenever the mathematical function is non-increasing, so is the floating-point approximation. Not all approximations that have 1 ulp accuracy will automatically meet the monotonicity requirements.

The platform uses signed two's complement integer arithmetic with int and long primitive types. The developer should choose the primitive type to ensure that arithmetic operations consistently produce correct results, which in some cases means the operations will not overflow the range of values of the computation. The best practice is to choose the primitive type and algorithm to avoid overflow. In cases where the size is int or long and overflow errors need to be detected, the methods addExact, subtractExact, multiplyExact, and toIntExact throw an ArithmeticException when the results overflow. For other arithmetic operations such as divide, absolute value, increment, decrement, and negation overflow occurs only with a specific minimum or maximum value and should be checked against the minimum or maximum as appropriate.

Summary
Constants
double	E
The double value that is closer than any other to e, the base of the natural logarithms.

double	PI
The double value that is closer than any other to pi, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter.

Public methods
static double	IEEEremainder(double f1, double f2)
Computes the remainder operation on two arguments as prescribed by the IEEE 754 standard.

static long	abs(long a)
Returns the absolute value of a long value.

static int	abs(int a)
Returns the absolute value of an int value.

static float	abs(float a)
Returns the absolute value of a float value.

static double	abs(double a)
Returns the absolute value of a double value.

static double	acos(double a)
Returns the arc cosine of a value; the returned angle is in the range 0.0 through pi.

static int	addExact(int x, int y)
Returns the sum of its arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static long	addExact(long x, long y)
Returns the sum of its arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static double	asin(double a)
Returns the arc sine of a value; the returned angle is in the range -pi/2 through pi/2.

static double	atan(double a)
Returns the arc tangent of a value; the returned angle is in the range -pi/2 through pi/2.

static double	atan2(double y, double x)
Returns the angle theta from the conversion of rectangular coordinates (x, y) to polar coordinates (r, theta).

static double	cbrt(double a)
Returns the cube root of a double value.

static double	ceil(double a)
Returns the smallest (closest to negative infinity) double value that is greater than or equal to the argument and is equal to a mathematical integer.

static float	copySign(float magnitude, float sign)
Returns the first floating-point argument with the sign of the second floating-point argument.

static double	copySign(double magnitude, double sign)
Returns the first floating-point argument with the sign of the second floating-point argument.

static double	cos(double a)
Returns the trigonometric cosine of an angle.

static double	cosh(double x)
Returns the hyperbolic cosine of a double value.

static long	decrementExact(long a)
Returns the argument decremented by one, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static int	decrementExact(int a)
Returns the argument decremented by one, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static double	exp(double a)
Returns Euler's number e raised to the power of a double value.

static double	expm1(double x)
Returns ex -1.

static double	floor(double a)
Returns the largest (closest to positive infinity) double value that is less than or equal to the argument and is equal to a mathematical integer.

static int	floorDiv(int x, int y)
Returns the largest (closest to positive infinity) int value that is less than or equal to the algebraic quotient.

static long	floorDiv(long x, long y)
Returns the largest (closest to positive infinity) long value that is less than or equal to the algebraic quotient.

static long	floorMod(long x, long y)
Returns the floor modulus of the long arguments.

static int	floorMod(int x, int y)
Returns the floor modulus of the int arguments.

static int	getExponent(double d)
Returns the unbiased exponent used in the representation of a double.

static int	getExponent(float f)
Returns the unbiased exponent used in the representation of a float.

static double	hypot(double x, double y)
Returns sqrt(x2 +y2) without intermediate overflow or underflow.

static int	incrementExact(int a)
Returns the argument incremented by one, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static long	incrementExact(long a)
Returns the argument incremented by one, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static double	log(double a)
Returns the natural logarithm (base e) of a double value.

static double	log10(double a)
Returns the base 10 logarithm of a double value.

static double	log1p(double x)
Returns the natural logarithm of the sum of the argument and 1.

static int	max(int a, int b)
Returns the greater of two int values.

static long	max(long a, long b)
Returns the greater of two long values.

static float	max(float a, float b)
Returns the greater of two float values.

static double	max(double a, double b)
Returns the greater of two double values.

static float	min(float a, float b)
Returns the smaller of two float values.

static double	min(double a, double b)
Returns the smaller of two double values.

static int	min(int a, int b)
Returns the smaller of two int values.

static long	min(long a, long b)
Returns the smaller of two long values.

static int	multiplyExact(int x, int y)
Returns the product of the arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static long	multiplyExact(long x, long y)
Returns the product of the arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static int	negateExact(int a)
Returns the negation of the argument, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static long	negateExact(long a)
Returns the negation of the argument, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static double	nextAfter(double start, double direction)
Returns the floating-point number adjacent to the first argument in the direction of the second argument.

static float	nextAfter(float start, double direction)
Returns the floating-point number adjacent to the first argument in the direction of the second argument.

static double	nextDown(double d)
Returns the floating-point value adjacent to d in the direction of negative infinity.

static float	nextDown(float f)
Returns the floating-point value adjacent to f in the direction of negative infinity.

static float	nextUp(float f)
Returns the floating-point value adjacent to f in the direction of positive infinity.

static double	nextUp(double d)
Returns the floating-point value adjacent to d in the direction of positive infinity.

static double	pow(double a, double b)
Returns the value of the first argument raised to the power of the second argument.

static double	random()
Returns a double value with a positive sign, greater than or equal to 0.0 and less than 1.0.

static double	rint(double a)
Returns the double value that is closest in value to the argument and is equal to a mathematical integer.

static long	round(double a)
Returns the closest long to the argument, with ties rounding to positive infinity.

static int	round(float a)
Returns the closest int to the argument, with ties rounding to positive infinity.

static float	scalb(float f, int scaleFactor)
Returns f × 2scaleFactor rounded as if performed by a single correctly rounded floating-point multiply to a member of the float value set.

static double	scalb(double d, int scaleFactor)
Returns d × 2scaleFactor rounded as if performed by a single correctly rounded floating-point multiply to a member of the double value set.

static double	signum(double d)
Returns the signum function of the argument; zero if the argument is zero, 1.0 if the argument is greater than zero, -1.0 if the argument is less than zero.

static float	signum(float f)
Returns the signum function of the argument; zero if the argument is zero, 1.0f if the argument is greater than zero, -1.0f if the argument is less than zero.

static double	sin(double a)
Returns the trigonometric sine of an angle.

static double	sinh(double x)
Returns the hyperbolic sine of a double value.

static double	sqrt(double a)
Returns the correctly rounded positive square root of a double value.

static long	subtractExact(long x, long y)
Returns the difference of the arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows a long.

static int	subtractExact(int x, int y)
Returns the difference of the arguments, throwing an exception if the result overflows an int.

static double	tan(double a)
Returns the trigonometric tangent of an angle.

static double	tanh(double x)
Returns the hyperbolic tangent of a double value.

static double	toDegrees(double angrad)
Converts an angle measured in radians to an approximately equivalent angle measured in degrees.

static int	toIntExact(long value)
Returns the value of the long argument; throwing an exception if the value overflows an int.

static double	toRadians(double angdeg)
Converts an angle measured in degrees to an approximately equivalent angle measured in radians.

static double	ulp(double d)
Returns the size of an ulp of the argument.

static float	ulp(float f)
Returns the size of an ulp of the argument.

Inherited methods
  From class java.lang.Object
Constants
E
added in API level 1
double E
The double value that is closer than any other to e, the base of the natural logarithms.

Constant Value: 2.718281828459045

PI
added in API level 1
double PI
The double value that is closer than any other to pi, the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter.

Constant Value: 3.141592653589793